So first, we need to open up the console,
and then enter the top command which starts up an interactive command-line application.
Let me do this here. Let's enter top, press enter.
Okay, here we go. Now, to the upper half
of the output contains statistics on processes and
resource usage where the lower half or
the lower two-thirds contains a list of the currently running processes.
You can use the arrow keys to browse through this list,
and if you want to quit simply press Q like this.
Okay. Let's open it up again.
Okay. At the top here,
you can see the total number of processes as well as their states,
which might be either running or sleeping in this case.
There are other states as well, but for now this is not important to us.
Also, you can see the total number of threads this scheduler currently needs to manage.
At this point in time,
it's 2,024 threads in the system.
Also here, you have the average load of the system.
CPU is used up roughly by two percent,
three percent, it fluctuates a little bit and the rest of the system is idle.
Also, you have some memory statistics here which are currently not important to us.
Now, the list of programs below here,
you can also see details on each of the currently active programs.
So this includes the program ID on the left-hand side here,
its name, the memory usage, CPU usage,
and also the number of currently active threads which is this abbreviation here TH.
For example Dropbox, the web application uses 16 threads while
the recording tool which I'm currently using uses up 15 threads and another 12 down here.
So quite a few number of threads here.
It seems my recording application is highly parallelized, which is a good thing.
Let's take a look at a small example program here which I wrote.
Here in Visual Studio Code there is a small example program.
You don't need to understand all the things which happened here,
we will come to this in due course,
but let's take a quick look at what's happening here.
So first of all, we are including a header called
thread which gives us concurrent capabilities in C++,
we'll get to that, and also we are including a standard vector here.
So first of all,
we are creating a vector which is going to take some concurrent threads of execution,
we're going to store those for using them later Then,
we are starting up a certain number of threads.
In this example it's going to be four threads,
and this for loop here which goes from 0 to 1 below a number of threads.
We are starting up a thread here in the parentheses by using standard thread.
Then this construct here with all the brackets and parentheses,
and the curly brackets, this is called a lambda function.
We'll also get to that in the future.
But basically, this part here is what's
being sent to the thread to be executed in parallel,
and as you can see here,
this is an infinite while loop which which never quits.
Once we fire up this thread,
and we're going to do so four times,
we'll have four parallel threads of
execution each of which is running an infinite while loop never finishing,
and the idea here is to take a look at the process table here,
and see if we can find this number of threads in the list of processes.
At the end, once the for loop is finished because we're leaving the for loop,
even though those are executing infinite while loops,
and the reason we're even getting here is that
those threads are executed in parallel to the main program.
Let's fire up this program and see what happens in the process list.
Now, on the left-hand side you can now find the testThreads function here,
it's running at 400 percent.
So there might be some room for optimizing our infinite while loop,
maybe we could sleep for awhile with each cycle because currently,
400 percent seems a bit too much for actually doing nothing.
But it's not about demonstrating the CPU load here,
it's more about demonstrating the number of threads.
If you look here, that actually,
two numbers here a 5 and 4,
the 4 is the number of threads we put into action to execute the infinite while loop,
and can you guess the number 5 here?
Why is it 5 and not 4?
Because we only started four threads.
Any idea? Well, you might have guessed correctly.
It's the main thread,
which also gets counted as a single thread,
because every program has at least one thread, for example,
the bash program down here only one or do we find another one somewhere in the list?
currently not. Well, this one here the top program is also only one thread.
The rest is the worker threads we put to use here and
the one missing to complete five is the main program,
and let's go back to our main, to our small program here.
Let's stop it, and let's change the number of threads to let's say 10.
Let's run it again, and as you can see here,
we have now 10 threads up and running,
the CPU load is at 1000 percent,
and the total number of threads is at 11.